docs: adr-070 unordered transactions refactor (#23974)
cosmos/cosmos-sdk: docs/architecture/adr-070-unordered-account.md

Unordered transactions will bypass the traditional account sequence rules and follow the rules described
below, without impacting traditional ordered transactions; they'll follow the sequence rules the same as before.

We will introduce new storage of time-based, ephemeral unordered sequences using the SDK's existing KV Store library.

When an unordered transaction is included in a block, a concatenation of the `timeout_timestamp` and sender’s bech32 address
will be recorded to state (i.e. `542939323/cosmos1v1234567890AbcDeF`). In cases of multi-party signing, we will use a
comma-separated list of the addresses that signed the transaction (i.e. `5532231/cosmosv11,cosmosv12,cosmosv13`)

New transactions will be checked against the state to prevent duplicate submissions. To prevent the state from growing indefinitely, we propose the following:

- Define an upper bound for the value of `timeout_timestamp` (i.e. 10 minutes).
- Extend the PreBlocker method to remove state entries with a `timeout_timestamp` earlier than the current block time.

### Transaction Format

```protobuf
message TxBody {
  ...
          
  bool unordered = 4;

>   google.protobuf.Timestamp timeout_timestamp = 5

Reviewer: this was just missing from the prev spec right?

Author: yes

  ...

          
  bool unordered = 4;
  google.protobuf.Timestamp timeout_timestamp = 5
}
```

### Replay Protection

In order to provide replay protection, a user should ensure that the transaction's
TTL value is relatively short-lived but long enough to provide enough time to be
included in a block, e.g. ~10 minutes.

We facilitate this by storing the transaction's hash in a durable map, `UnorderedTxManager`,
to prevent duplicates, i.e. replay attacks. Upon transaction ingress during `CheckTx`,
we check if the transaction's hash exists in this map or if the TTL value is stale,
i.e. before the current block time. If so, we reject it. Upon inclusion in a block
during `DeliverTx`, the transaction's hash is set in the map along with it's TTL
value.

This map is evaluated at the end of each block, e.g. ABCI `Commit`, and all stale
transactions, i.e. transactions's TTL value who's now beyond the committed block,
are purged from the map.

An important point to note is that in theory, it may be possible to submit an unordered
transaction twice, or multiple times, before the transaction is included in a block.
However, we'll note a few important layers of protection and mitigation:

> * Assuming CometBFT is used as the underlying consensus engine and a non-noop mempool

Reviewer: this is interesting to me.  If we guarantee that you are using cometbft (which the SDK does), comet just takes care of this for you?

Author: did you get this answered?

> }

Reviewer 2: What module do we want to have this in? All KV store keys need a module. x/auth seems the most logical, but we could also have a small dedicated x/auth/unordered module.

Also, I think we can just use `collections.Set` to deal with state here.

Author: > What module do we want to have this in?

are there tradeoffs between doing one or the other?

> Also, I think we can just use collections.Set to deal with state here.

i was toying around with this, but was having trouble figuring out how to iterate from nil to a partial value of `<block_time/`.

Author: i have a PoC where i've made unordered a thing managed directly by x/auth store/keeper. you can check it out here: https://github.com/cosmos/cosmos-sdk/pull/24010

i also switched to using collections after playing with the API more.

Author: makes sense - i did find it cumbersome going back and forth between this and the draft. throwing some simple python in here would be easier to deal with

> func (m *Manager) Contains(ctx sdk.Context, sender string, timestamp uint64) (bool, error) {

Reviewer: this is example code but somewhere here we support multi-signers right?

Author: i can document this better, but im treating `sender string` as the possibility of just `cosmosv123521` or `cosmosv1235325,cosmosvio324j234,cosmosvasj324lk2j3`

  return m.kvStore.OpenKVStore(ctx).Has([]byte(NewUnorderedSequence(sender, timestamp)))
}

func (m *Manager) Add(ctx sdk.Context, sender string, timestamp uint64) error {
  return m.kvStore.OpenKVStore(ctx).Set([]byte(NewUnorderedSequence(sender, timestamp)), []byte(byte(0x0)))
}

func (m *Manager) RemoveExpired(ctx sdk.Context) error {
  kvStore := m.kvStore.OpenKVStore(ctx)

>   it, err := kvStore.Iterator(nil, []byte(NewUnorderedSequence("", uint64(ctx.BlockTime().UnixNano()))))

Reviewer: So this runs from "the beginning to the blocktime"?

Author: yes

## Changelog

- Dec 4, 2023: Initial Draft (@yihuang, @tac0turtle, @alexanderbez)
- Jan 30, 2024: Include section on deterministic transaction encoding

> - Mar 12, 2025: Revise implementation to use Cosmos SDK KV Store and require unique timeouts per-address (@technicallyty)

Reviewer: Update date whenever we merge

## Status

> Draft

Reviewer: Update to accpeted whenever we merge

Reviewer 2: So if we're following PROCESS.md, this should probably be `ACCEPTED Not Implemented`

## Abstract

We propose a way to do replay-attack protection without enforcing the order of
transactions and without requiring the use of monotonically increasing sequences. Instead, we propose
the use of a time-based, ephemeral sequence.

## Context

Account sequence values serve to prevent replay-attacks and ensure transactions from the same sender are included into blocks and executed
in sequential order. Unfortunately, this makes it difficult to reliably send many concurrent transactions from the
same sender. Victims of such limitations include IBC relayers and crypto exchanges.

## Decision

> We propose adding a boolean field `unordered` and a uint64 field `timeout_timestamp` to the transaction body.

Reviewer 2: What we've added is `google.protobuf.Timestamp`, not `uint64`. Which one do we want?

Author: changed to timestamp

Unordered transactions will bypass the traditional account sequence rules and follow the rules described

> below, without impacting traditional ordered transactions; they'll follow the sequence rules the same as before.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
below, without impacting traditional ordered transactions which will follow the same sequence rules as before.
```

We will introduce new storage of time-based, ephemeral unordered sequences using the SDK's existing KV Store library. 
Specifically, we will leverage the existing x/auth KV store to store the unordered sequences.

When an unordered transaction is included in a block, a concatenation of the `timeout_timestamp` and sender’s bech32 address

> will be recorded to state (i.e. `542939323/cosmos1v1234567890AbcDeF`). In cases of multi-party signing, we will use a sorted,

Reviewer 2: Why bech32 encoded? Shouldn't we just use the binary address bytes?

Author: i'll change it to bytes. the PoC used the pubkey.address.string() but i can just use bytes

Author: actually, this complicates the impl a bit, since i was using the concat of pubkey address strings. lmk what you think

Author: since the update to one entry per signer, i have changed it to just use the pubkey bytes.

Reviewer 2: So we want to use the address, not the pubkey bytes which could depend on how the pubkey is serialized. As an alternative to the address that may be even better is just using the account number which is just a `uint64`

> comma-separated list of the addresses that signed the transaction (i.e. `5532231/cosmosv11,cosmosv12,cosmosv13`)

Reviewer: we should specify that this is sorted (and implement it as sorted)

Reviewer: theoretically you could submit two Tx with the same timestamp with with A, B, C signers and B, A, C signers right?

These are effectively the same Tx but in the store (if not sorted) would be considered two separate

> comma-separated list of the public key addresses that signed the transaction (i.e. `5532231/5AEKNF,5AEKNE,5AEKNR`)

Reviewer 2: Isn't it simpler to just store one entry per signer? I guess this is okay too

Author: updated to 1 entry per signer

New transactions will be checked against the state to prevent duplicate submissions. To prevent the state from growing indefinitely, we propose the following:

- Define an upper bound for the value of `timeout_timestamp` (i.e. 10 minutes).
- Extend the PreBlocker method to remove state entries with a `timeout_timestamp` earlier than the current block time.

### Transaction Format

```protobuf
message TxBody {
  ...
          
  bool unordered = 4;
  google.protobuf.Timestamp timeout_timestamp = 5
}
```

### Replay Protection

We facilitate replay protection by storing the unordered sequence, in the Cosmos SDK KV store. Upon transaction ingress, we check if the transaction's unordered
sequence exists in state, or if the TTL value is stale, i.e. before the current block time. If so, we reject it. Otherwise,
we add the unordered sequence to state. This section of the state will belong to the `x/auth` module.

The state is evaluated during x/auth's `PreBlocker`. All transactions with an unordered sequence earlier than the current block time
will be deleted.

```go
func (am AppModule) PreBlock(ctx context.Context) (appmodule.ResponsePreBlock, error) {

> 	err := am.accountKeeper.GetUnorderedTxManager().RemoveExpired(sdk.UnwrapSDKContext(ctx))

Reviewer: we should have NPE protection on this for when users do not use this

Author: the account keeper currently always has this instantiated, so it wouldn't NPE

you can specify to enable the unordered ante in the ante options, but we'd likely need another option if we want to enable/disable this. might be awkward UX to specify this in two different places though. probably best to walk through this on a call

Reviewer: Yeah I see your point - lets just be aware of it when we do code reviews for this.  I think you're right about how it is awkward if users have to set in multiple places

Reviewer 2: Any thoughts here? Looks like this was marked as resolved

	if err != nil {
		return nil, err
	}
	return &sdk.ResponsePreBlock{ConsensusParamsChanged: false}, nil
}
```

```golang
package keeper

import (
	sdk "github.com/cosmos/cosmos-sdk/types"

	"cosmossdk.io/collections"
	"cosmossdk.io/core/store"
)

var (
	// just arbitrarily picking some upper bound number.

> 	unorderedSequencePrefix = collections.NewPrefix(90)

Reviewer: what does this mean

Author: theres existing prefixes in the store, and i'm just picking a higher number to stay out of their way. maybe if unordered grows, it can occupy all 9x prefixes. 🤷 but yeah, mostly arbitrary

	unorderedSequencePrefix = collections.NewPrefix(90)
)

type AccountKeeper struct {
	// ...
	unorderedSequences collections.KeySet[collections.Pair[uint64, []byte]]
}

func (m *AccountKeeper) Contains(ctx sdk.Context, sender []byte, timestamp uint64) (bool, error) {
	return m.unorderedSequences.Has(ctx, collections.Join(timestamp, sender))
}

func (m *AccountKeeper) Add(ctx sdk.Context, sender []byte, timestamp uint64) error {
	return m.unorderedSequences.Set(ctx, collections.Join(timestamp, sender))
}

> func (m *AccountKeeper) RemoveExpired(ctx sdk.Context) error {

Reviewer 2: I would just suggest something a little more detailed than simply `Contains`, `Add`, etc. that mentions unordered

  execMode := ctx.ExecMode()
  if execMode == sdk.ExecModeSimulate {
    return nil
  }

  addr := getSender(tx)

  contains, err := d.txManager.Contains(ctx, sender, uint64(unorderedTx.GetTimeoutTimeStamp().UnixNano()))
  if err != nil {
    return errorsmod.Wrap(
      sdkerrors.ErrIO,
      "failed to check contains",
    )
  }
  if contains {
    return errorsmod.Wrap(
      sdkerrors.ErrInvalidRequest,
      "tx is duplicated",
    )
  }

  if err := d.txManager.Add(ctx, sender, uint64(unorderedTx.GetTimeoutTimeStamp().UnixNano())); err != nil {
    return errorsmod.Wrap(
      sdkerrors.ErrIO,
      "failed to add unordered nonce to state",
    )
  }

  return nil
}

```

### Unordered Sequences

Unordered sequences provide a simple, straightforward mechanism to protect against both transaction malleability and
transaction duplication. It is important to note, however, that the unordered sequence must still be unique, however
the value is not required to be strictly increasing as with regular sequences, and the order in which the node receives
the transactions no longer matters. Relayers can handle setting timeouts similarly to the code below:

```go
for _, tx := range txs {

> 	tx.SetTimeoutTimestamp(time.Now() + 1 * time.Nanosecond)

Author: added

		)
	}

	return nil
}

func getSigners(tx sdk.Tx) ([]string, error) {
	sigTx, ok := tx.(authsigning.SigVerifiableTx)
	if !ok {
		return nil, errorsmod.Wrap(sdkerrors.ErrTxDecode, "invalid tx type")
	}
	sigs, err := sigTx.GetSignaturesV2()
	if err != nil {
		return nil, err
	}

	addresses := make([]string, 0, len(sigs))
	for _, sig := range sigs {
		addresses = append(addresses, sig.PubKey.Address().String())
	}

	return addresses, nil
}

```

### Unordered Sequences

Unordered sequences provide a simple, straightforward mechanism to protect against both transaction malleability and
transaction duplication. It is important to note, however, that the unordered sequence must still be unique, however
the value is not required to be strictly increasing as with regular sequences, and the order in which the node receives
the transactions no longer matters. Clients can handle setting timeouts similarly to the code below:

```go
for _, tx := range txs {
	tx.SetUnordered(true)
	tx.SetTimeoutTimestamp(time.Now() + 1 * time.Nanosecond)
}
```

### State Management

The storage of unordered sequences will be facilitated using the Cosmos SDK's KV Store service.

> ## Note On Previous Iteration

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Note On Previous Design Iteration
```
